---
layout: project
title: "Enhancing General Chemistry Education through Innovative Pedagogical Approaches"
image: "/images/ai/project-11.jpg"
projectid: EChEmpower
contributors: Kahveci M
duration: 2023 - 2024
year: 2023
publisher:
position: "PI: [Kahveci M](/murat)"
hostedby: Loyola University Chicago
fundedby: Loyola University Chicago - Faculty Fellowship in the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning ([SOTL](/gde))
budget: N/A
pdf:
web: https://kahveci.pw/ewm
excerpt: "Welcome to EChEmpower, where we are dedicated to transforming the landscape of chemistry education! Our mission is clear: to enhance the quality of chemistry education through innovative pedagogical methods. We understand the challenges that students face when it comes to misconceptions, and we're committed to identifying and rectifying these issues in the general chemistry context."
project: true
---

## Synopsis

Our research project is dedicated to revolutionizing the landscape of general chemistry education. Recognizing the pervasive challenge of student misconceptions and their impact on learning, we are motivated to explore groundbreaking pedagogical methods that can identify and rectify these misconceptions. Our collaborative approach involves a diverse team of experts in education, curriculum design, and pedagogy, along with faculty members specializing in general chemistry. Over two distinct phases, spanning from Fall 2023 to Spring 2025, we will develop diagnostic tools, conduct comparative studies, and assess the impact of innovative teaching strategies. Our research is guided by student-centered design and constructivist epistemology, within the framework of [Ignatian Pedagogy](https://www.luc.edu/fcip/ignatianpedagogy/whatisignatianpedagogy/). Our ultimate goal is to provide evidence-based teaching strategies that will enhance the quality of general chemistry education. By sharing our findings at renowned conferences and through peer-reviewed journals, we aim to inspire positive change in how general chemistry is taught and learned. Join us in this transformative journey to improve the educational experience in general chemistry.

## Project Acronym

**EChEmpower**

**ECh**: Enhancing Chemistry
**Empower**: Signifies the empowerment of both educators and students through innovative pedagogical approaches. By addressing misconceptions and enhancing the learning experience, the project aims to empower all stakeholders involved in chemistry education.

## Project Description

1. **Background and Motivation**: This project is motivated by the pressing need to improve the quality of education in general chemistry courses. Many students struggle with misconceptions and find it challenging to grasp fundamental concepts, which can hinder their progress in science-related fields. To address this issue, our research aims to explore innovative pedagogical approaches that can uncover and rectify misconceptions, thereby enhancing the overall learning experience in general chemistry.

2. **Collaborative Approach**: Collaboration is at the heart of this research project. Our collaborative approach involves partnering with faculty members who teach general chemistry courses, combining their domain knowledge with pedagogical expertise. This collaboration ensures a holistic perspective on the problem and encourages innovative solutions.

3. **Research Phases**: 
   1. **Phase 1 (Fall 2023 - Spring 2024)**: During this initial phase, we will identify professors teaching general chemistry and pinpoint topics that students commonly struggle with. Diagnostic tools will be developed, including surveys to gather student misconceptions, and the construction of second-tier items in these tools. A pilot study will be conducted, and construct validity and reliability studies will be established.

   2. **Phase 2 (Fall 2024 - Spring 2025)**: In this phase, we will collect more data and conduct comparative studies to assess the impact of the previous year's knowledge of misconceptions on professors' teaching strategies. We will examine whether these adjustments result in the elimination of student misconceptions and improved learning outcomes.

4. **Pedagogical Frameworks**: Our research will employ innovative pedagogical frameworks such as student-centered design and constructivist epistemology within the context of Ignatian Pedagogy. These frameworks will guide the design of interventions aimed at uncovering and addressing misconceptions in general chemistry courses.

5. **Outcomes and Contribution**: This research project seeks to contribute significantly to the field of chemistry education. By providing evidence-based teaching strategies, we aim to promote student-centered design and constructivism in general chemistry courses. Our work will offer valuable insights into the teaching and learning process, particularly in how to identify and address misconceptions related to challenging topics. Ultimately, we aspire to enhance students' ability to master key concepts and improve their overall learning outcomes.

6. **Research Dissemination**: To ensure that our findings reach a wider audience, we plan to disseminate the research outcomes through multiple channels. We will present our results at prominent conferences in Chemistry Education Research, including the Biennial Conference on Chemical Education and the National Association for Research in Science Teaching International Conference. Additionally, we will submit manuscripts to esteemed peer-reviewed journals such as the Journal of Chemical Education (JCE), Chemistry Education Research and Practice (CERP), and the Journal of Research in Science Teaching (JRST). This dissemination strategy is intended to make our research findings accessible to educators, researchers, and practitioners in the field, promoting the adoption of effective teaching strategies and pedagogical approaches in general chemistry education.

### Conclusion

In summary, our research project is driven by a shared commitment to enhancing general chemistry education through innovative pedagogical approaches. By fostering collaboration among educators, applying student-centered design and constructivist epistemology, and sharing our findings widely, we aim to make a lasting impact on the teaching and learning of general chemistry and contribute valuable insights to the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning.

{%- include project-contributions.html -%}
