---
layout: course
image: /images/courses/bogazici-university.png
code: SCED 498
title: "Special Studies: Applied Research in Education"
instructor: Murat Kahveci
instructorurl: /murat
institution: Boğaziçi University
insturl: "http://www.boun.edu.tr"
clevel: Undergraduate
year: 2006
semester: Fall 2006, and Spring 2006
pdf:
web:
---

## Course Description

SCED 498 is an advanced undergraduate course designed to provide students with a comprehensive understanding of research methodologies and their application within the field of education. We emphasize the importance of evidence-based practices in Science and Mathematics Education.

## Course Objectives

* Develop Research Skills: SCED 498 focuses on equipping students with the essential skills and knowledge necessary to conduct rigorous educational research. Students will learn to design research projects, collect and analyze data, and draw meaningful conclusions.

* Explore Educational Issues: Through a variety of case studies and real-world examples, students will explore contemporary issues in education and consider how research can inform and address these challenges.

* Apply Research to Practice: This course emphasizes the practical application of research findings to educational settings. Students will learn to bridge the gap between theory and practice, enabling them to make informed decisions and improvements in educational contexts.

* Enhance Critical Thinking: SCED 498 encourages critical thinking and problem-solving by examining research literature and evaluating the quality of research studies. Students will learn to assess the validity and reliability of educational research and make informed judgments.

