---
layout: course
image: /images/courses/luc.png
code: CHEM 171
title: General Chemistry for Engineering
instructor: Murat Kahveci
instructorurl: /murat
institution: Loyola University Chicago
insturl: "https://www.luc.edu/"
clevel: Undergraduate
year: 2023
semester: Fall 2023, Fall 2022, and Fall 2021
pdf: pdfs/syllabi/CHEM171_FA23.pdf
web: "https://sakai.luc.edu/"
published: true
---

## Course Description

To acquaint students with fundamental concepts of chemistry and their applications in engineering science. Multiple perspectives of matter will be used to describe and explain characteristics, properties, and relationships across the following topics: atoms and molecules, solutions, reaction kinetics, equilibria, acids and bases, reaction thermodynamics, electrochemical reactions.

Students will deepen their understanding of foundational concepts of chemistry and advance their skills in scientific problem solving, critical thinking and synthesis of concepts, such that students will be able to do the following:
- Use multiple perspectives of matter (macroscopic, particle, symbolic levels) to qualitatively describe and explain characteristics, properties, and relationships of the following: atoms and molecules, solutions, reaction kinetics, equilibria, acids and bases, reaction thermodynamics, and electrochemical reactions. 
- Quantify relationships between variables controlling chemical systems.
- Solve quantitative multistep problems combining multiple concepts within the systems.
- Differentiate among closely related factors, categorize problem types, and select appropriate tools to solve these problems.
- Apply chemical principles to explain natural phenomena.


## Textbook and Materials

### Textbook

1. “Chemistry for Engineering Students”, 4th edit. by Larry Brown and Tom Holme (Cengage Learning, Inc., 2019) ISBN 978-1-337-39890-9 is required. 
2. The Student Solutions Manual with Study Guide, ISBN 978-1-337-39906-7 is recommended.

### Lecture Notes

Lecture notes/handouts for each chapter will be made available electronically. Students are expected to “fill in the blanks” (take notes) with calculations, chemical equations, and structures in the handouts as the lectures proceed. When set of notes is completed for a Chapter, a completed version will be posted in Sakai.

### Other Materials

You will need an inexpensive calculator having logarithmic (base 10 and base e), expo- nential, and trigonometric functions. Be sure you are familiar with your calculator and that it is in user-ready condition for quizzes and exams. Calculators cannot be shared during exams and the covers must be removed while taking the exam. You are not allowed to have a cell phone during the exam.


## Tentative Schedule (CHEM171-001 FA23)

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/courses/hsm-1.jpg"
   title="Figure 1"
   caption="Page 1." %}

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/courses/hsm-2.jpg"
   title="Figure 2"
   caption="Page 2." %}

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/courses/hsm-3.jpg"
   title="Figure 3"
   caption="Page 3." %}