---
layout: course
image: /images/courses/wheeling-uni.png
code: CHEM 221
title: Organic Chemistry I
instructor: Murat Kahveci
instructorurl: /murat
institution: Wheeling University
insturl: "https://wheeling.edu/"
clevel: Undergraduate
year: 2024
semester: Fall 2024
pdf: 
web: "https://wheeling.instructure.com/courses/1818"
published: true
---

# Course Description

This course, CHEM 221 - Organic Chemistry I, is designed to provide foundational knowledge and proficiency in essential organic chemistry concepts and skills. Topics include organic molecule structures, stereochemistry, nomenclature, synthesis, uses, and reactions of alcohols, ethers, and aliphatic hydrocarbons. Modern theories of bonding and reactivity underpin the course content.

The course includes the following major themes:
* Structure and bonding
* Stereochemistry
* Organic molecules and functional groups
* Reactions, synthesis, and mechanisms (substitution, elimination, and addition)
* Sustainability and green chemistry principles

## Learning Outcomes

This course emphasizes understanding, investigation, explanation, and application over rote memorization. Students will:
* Understand bonding and structures of alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes.
* Recognize various types of isomerism in hydrocarbons.
* Represent electron flow in organic reactions using curly arrows.
* Quantify and analyze relationships within chemical systems.
* Communicate findings effectively, demonstrating an ability to analyze, evaluate, and present results.

## Required Course Materials

* **Textbook**: *Organic Chemistry* by McMurry, OpenStax, 10th Edition (uploaded to the course page).
* **Homework platform**: Online assignments and activities through the university's LMS.
* **Online tools**: Zoom for lectures and office hours.
* **Scientific Calculator**: Non-programmable and non-graphing.
* **LMS platforms**: For homework submission, feedback, and grades (e.g., Gradescope).

## Evaluation Methods

Students will be assessed based on:
* Homework assignments (50 points each, lowest grade dropped).
* Exams (100 points each, lowest grade dropped).
* Participation, including attendance tracked through assignments and office hours.

### Grading Scale:
* 94-100%: A
* 91-93%: A-
* 87-90%: B+
* 80-86%: B
* 77-79%: B-
* 73-76%: C+
* 67-73%: C
* 63-66%: C-
* 60-62%: D+
* 55-59%: D
* <54%: F  
