---
layout: paper
title: "Micro-patterning of reaction arrays for self-organizing systems"
image: https://placehold.co/96x96/6A0DAD/ffffff?text=ACS\n2002
authors: Kahveci M, Hamik C, Steinbock O
year: 2002
publisher: American Chemical Society (ACS)
projectid:
ref: "[Kahveci M](/murat), Hamik C, & Steinbock O. (2002). _Micro-patterning of reaction arrays for self-organizing systems_. Paper presented at the American Chemical Society (ACS). [Poster]. Orlando, USA. April 7 - 11, 2002."
pdf:
doi:
excerpt: This research details the **micro-patterning of reaction arrays** to study self-organizing chemical systems.
conference: true
---

Recent advances in the photolithographic fabrication of micro-patterned elastomers open
intriguing possibilities for the study of chemical self-organization in spatially structured
reaction systems and coupled reactor arrays. Here, we present several procedures for the
preparation of micro-patterned matrices for the Belousov-Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction and
discuss their relative merits and limitations. These experimental strategies involve the use
of photo-resist masters (SU-8) and poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) molds as well as the
filling of the molds with aqueous reaction solutions. All of our experiments are carried out
with the 1,4-cyclohexanedione-bromate-ferroin BZ system. This system is highly suitable
for the use in micro-patterned reactor arrays because the reaction does not involve the
formation of gaseous products that could give rise to undesired bubbles. In particular, we
discuss the propagation and the interaction of constant-speed oxidation waves in different
width sizes of linear channels as well as in a cone shape channel of excitable CHD-BZ
medium. Experiments performed in capillary tubes ranging from 2 µm to 1200 µm have
shown that there is no size dependence on velocities of oxidation waves.1 On the contrary,
the oxidation waves traveled with different velocities inside the micro reactor arrays in
PDMS due to the high bromine diffusion into the PDMS compared to glass capillary.
Bromine acts as an inhibitor for BZ reaction reducing the velocity of oxidation waves.
Furthermore, the micro reactor arrays provide a better approximation for one spatial
dimension for the BZ system, which is easier to simulate.

{% include citation.html %}