---
layout: paper
title: "Self-perception in learning mathematics"
image: https://placehold.co/96x96/6A0DAD/ffffff?text=NCSME\n2006
authors: Kahveci M, Oztekin B, Algedik E
year: 2006
publisher: National Conference on Science and Mathematics Education
projectid:
ref: "[Kahveci M](/murat), [Oztekin B](/basak), & [Algedik E](/elif). (2006). _Self-perception in learning mathematics_. Paper presented at the National Conference on Science and Mathematics Education. Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey. September 7 - 9, 2006."
pdf:
doi:
excerpt: This study analyzes Turkish high-school students' mathematics self-concept, linking self-perception to motivation across four key attitudinal categories.
conference: true
---

This study investigated the mathematics self-concept of students in several high schools in the northwest of Türkiye. A total of 236 students (147 female and 89 male) from 9th, 10th, and 11th grades across various institutions, including public and private schools, participated in the data collection. The data for this quantitative research was gathered using the Fennema-Sherman Mathematics Attitude Scales (Fennema & Sherman, 1976)[^1]. This scale aims to reveal students' perceptions of various factors by querying their attitudes toward learning mathematics, self-confidence, the practical utility of mathematics in one's life, teacher attitudes toward students, and the role of gender in learning mathematics. The scale was translated into Turkish for a reliable application and meaningful interpretation. The Cronbach's Alpha test confirmed the high reliability of the scale (total=.92).

Due to the high correlation among the 47 questions on the scale, a Factor Analysis was performed (BartlettTest,p=.000). The Factor Analysis resulted in the typical Fennema-Sherman categories listed above. However, 10 questions were omitted from the final analysis because their contribution to the factor categories was not sufficient and they negatively affected the internal reliability of the scale. As a result, a General Linear Model (GLM) analysis with advanced Post-Hoc comparison was conducted on a total of four categories. This analysis allowed for a detailed comparison of students' responses for each of the four categories based on age, gender, grade, and mathematics grades. These comparisons and their results are discussed in detail.

Important findings regarding the relationship between mathematics education and motivation in high schools were obtained. Based on the results of this study and a review of supporting literature, it was found that students' self-perceptions about mathematics are closely related to their motivation levels. This relationship was not only from one perspective but from four distinct perspectives, as revealed by the Factor Analysis and General Linear Model (GLM) analyses. These analyses separated the scale into four different categories: a student's personal confidence in the subject (mathematics), the student's perception of teacher attitudes, the usefulness of the subject's content, and the perception of the subject as male-dominated. Each category contains 12 questions, half of which are designed to determine students' positive attitudes toward mathematics and the other half their negative attitudes. For example, "I am sure I can learn mathematics" is a question to determine a student's positive attitude, while "I don't think I will use much mathematics after school" is a question aimed at determining a student's negative attitude.

This study observed that as students' grades increased, their self-confidence levels also showed a strong increase. Additionally, there were no statistically significant differences in self-confidence levels based on age and grade. However, the self-confidence of a 9th-grade student in mathematics was found to be statistically significantly lower than that of an 11th-grade student (p=.000).

Regarding the research on mathematics being male-dominated, no significant differences were observed in students' opinions on the idea that "women can do mathematics as well as men" based on age, grade, or their mathematics grades. However, the student's gender did cause a difference in their opinions on this topic (p=.001).

In the category related to the student's perception of teacher attitudes, no statistically significant relationships were found between differences in age, gender, grade, or students' mathematics grades and their perception of teacher attitudes.

Finally, it was observed that as students' mathematics grades increased, they better understood the practical utility of mathematics in a person's life.

---

[^1]: Fennema, E., & Sherman, J. A. (1976). Fennema-Sherman mathematics attitude scales. Instruments designed to measure the attitudes toward the learning of mathematics by females and males. JSAS: Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology, 6(Ms. No. 1225), 31.

{% include citation.html %}