---
layout: paper
title: "Quantifying high school students’ self- perceptions in learning chemistry"
image: https://placehold.co/96x96/6A0DAD/ffffff?text=NARST\n2009
authors: Kahveci M
year: 2009
publisher: National Association for Research in Science Teaching (NARST)
projectid:
ref: "[Kahveci M](/murat). 2009. _Quantifying high school students’ self- perceptions in learning chemistry_. Paper presented at the National Association for Research in Science Teaching (NARST). Garden Grove, CA, USA. April 17 - 21, 2009."
pdf:
doi:
excerpt: This study investigates high school students’ self-perceptions and attitudes toward learning chemistry based on personal characteristics.
conference: true
---

The purpose of this study was two-fold: (1) to investigate high school students’ self-perceptions in learning
chemistry by a comparative analysis with respect to varying personal characteristics such as gender, grade
level, and major (i.e., Science and Mathematics, Social Science-Mathematics, and Undecided) in learning
chemistry, and (2) to provide evidence for the reliability of the modified Fennema-Sherman attitude survey
to measure students’ attitudes towards learning chemistry. A modified version of Fennema-Sharman
attitude scale was administered to Language Prep, 9th, 10th, and 11th grade students. Reliability of the
instrument, factor analysis, and GLM analysis of the results were provided in detail. The internal
consistency analysis revealed that the instrument had Cronbach alpha values ranging from .90 to .73,
referred as highly reliable. The factor analysis showed that there were seven different thematic categories
among the items. Overall, findings indicated that students had positive attitudes towards learning
chemistry, regardless of their various personal characteristics such as gender, grade level, and major. In
addition, students at higher grades tended to have more satisfaction in learning chemistry compared to
lower grades. Although male and female students were moderately confident in learning chemistry, female
students rated statistically significantly higher than male students in their confidence ratings.

{% include citation.html %}