---
layout: paper
title: "Students’ perceptions to use technology for learning: Measurement integrity of the modified Fennema-Sherman attitudes scales"
image: https://placehold.co/96x96/0062B3/ffffff?text=TOJET\n2010
authors: Kahveci M
year: 2010
publisher: Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology
projectid:
ref: "[Kahveci M](/murat). (2010). [Students’ perceptions to use technology for learning: Measurement integrity of the modified Fennema-Sherman attitudes scales](/bdd). _Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 9_(1), 185- 201."
pdf:
doi:
excerpt: This study established the reliability of a Turkish-translated attitude scale and found high school students have positive attitudes toward learning with technology.
journal: true
---

The primary purpose of this two-part study was to establish the reliability of the Turkish-translated Fennema-Sherman Mathematics Attitude Scales (FSMAS), which were adapted for an educational technology context. The second objective was to examine the motivation of high school students to use technology for learning by comparing different personal characteristics such as gender, grade level, academic focus, and prior experience with technology. The modified FSMAS instrument was given to high school students in grades 9 through 12 at a gifted boarding school in Istanbul, Turkey. The scale was determined to be highly reliable, with a Cronbach's alpha ranging from 0.777 to 0.942, and a factor analysis identified eight distinct thematic categories.

Overall, the findings indicated that students generally hold positive attitudes toward using technology for learning, regardless of personal factors like gender or age. Students in lower grades were more satisfied with using technology than those in higher grades. While female students did not express a negative attitude, they reported feeling less confident in using technology compared to their male peers. Additionally, students with more prior experience were less confident in their technology use compared to those with less experience. Students proficient in science and mathematics expressed more confidence in their ability to use technology compared to those in social sciences.

{%- include citation.html -%}