---
layout: paper
title: "Physical chemistry education and learning objects (PChemLO): Affective aspects of implementation"
image: https://placehold.co/96x96/6A0DAD/ffffff?text=BCCE\n2012
authors: Kahveci M
year: 2012
publisher: Biennial Conference on Chemical Education (BCCE)
projectid: pchemlo
ref: "[Kahveci M](/murat). (2012). _Physical chemistry education and learning objects (PChemLO): Affective aspects of implementation_. Paper presented at the Biennial Conference on Chemical Education (BCCE). Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA. July 29 - August 2, 2012."
pdf:
excerpt: This presentation examines student attitudes and motivation in using inquiry-based learning objects for physical chemistry.
conference: true
---

This presentation includes the preliminary findings of the ongoing PChemLO project
(Kahveci, 2012), which is a collaborative project between the Divisions of Chemistry Education and
Physical Chemistry at Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University in Turkey. The main objectives of the project
are (a) to develop learning objects and (b) to investigate student attitudes and motivation to utilize
these learning objects for learning advanced chemistry topics, like the ones in physical chemistry
course. All learning objects are aimed at the principles of inquiry-based science education (IBSE). In
addition, integration of educational technology to support self-studying is in the center of all classroom
implementations. This system delivering learning objects allow instructors and researchers to track
student interventions with the course materials. Moodle LMS system was used to deploy the course
deliverables. The initial findings on the development of learning objects in the context of physical
chemistry and their effect on student learning was presented in this presentation. Learner attitudes
and other affective dimensions (as covariates) with respect to knowledge gain (as dependent variable)
were among the main foci as variables of investigation.

{% include citation.html %}