---
layout: paper
title: "Adaptation of learning objects to inquiry-based chemical education: Phase diagrams"
image: https://placehold.co/96x96/6A0DAD/ffffff?text=UKEK\n2013
authors: Kahveci M
year: 2013
publisher: National Chemistry Education Conference (UKEK)
projectid: pchemlo
ref: "[Kahveci M](/murat). (2013). _Adaptation of learning objects to inquiry-based chemical education: Phase diagrams_. Paper presented at the National Chemistry Education Conference (UKEK). Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey. September 5 - 7, 2013."
pdf:
doi:
excerpt: This study explores university students' misconceptions about phase diagrams and suggests active learning to improve understanding.
conference: true
---

This study investigates the conceptual understanding of phase diagrams among third-year university chemistry students. The primary objective was to determine the level of student comprehension and identify common misconceptions, as well as to examine the influence of gender on understanding. As part of a larger project on Physical Chemistry Education and Learning Objects, a new two-stage concept test was developed, referencing the Atkins Physical Chemistry textbook, and validated by a subject matter expert. The test was administered to 51 students (34 female, 17 male) at Çanakkale Onsekiz Mart University. Results indicate that a high number of students possess significant misconceptions related to phase diagrams, particularly concerning the graphical interpretation of liquid-vapor equilibrium and the distinction between ideal and real gases. Other areas of confusion include the relationship between external pressure and boiling point, and chemical potential and volume. The findings suggest that traditional teaching methods for advanced chemistry topics may lead to these misconceptions. The research concludes by advocating for the integration of active learning opportunities and educational technologies, such as learning objects, to facilitate a deeper and more accurate understanding of complex concepts like phase diagrams.

{% include citation.html %}