---
layout: paper
title: "Re-analysis of PISA 2003 data about students’ mathematics anxiety, self-efficacy, and motivation"
image: https://placehold.co/96x96/0062B3/ffffff?text=JRES\n2014
authors: Kahveci M, Imamoglu Y
year: 2014
publisher: Journal of Research in Education and Society
projectid:
ref: "[Kahveci M](/murat) & [Imamoglu Y](/yesim). (2014). [Re-analysis of PISA 2003 data about students’ mathematics anxiety, self-efficacy, and motivation](/ivl). _Journal of Research in Education and Society, 1_(1), 1-22."
pdf: /pdfs/papers/2014-03-20-pisa-math.pdf
rgpdf: 268212415
doi:
excerpt: A study using PISA 2003 data to investigate how students' math anxiety, motivation, and self-efficacy vary by gender, socioeconomic status, and geography.
journal: true
---

This study, relying on data from the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2003, investigated **students' anxiety, motivation, self-efficacy, and self-concept** in mathematics learning. The analysis was conducted on a large dataset of 272,138 students, aged 15-16, from 41 countries. The study utilized a two-stage stratified sampling strategy to collect the data. The findings demonstrated several key relationships: boys showed significantly higher mathematical self-efficacy, self-concept, and motivation, while having lower mathematics anxiety compared to girls. Additionally, students from higher socioeconomic status (SES) backgrounds had higher self-efficacy, self-concept, and motivation, whereas the highest levels of mathematics anxiety were found in students from a medium socioeconomic level. The study also revealed that these affective constructs—self-efficacy, self-concept, motivation, and anxiety—varied significantly across different geographical regions. For example, Asian countries like Korea and Japan showed high math performance despite low self-concept and high anxiety, while some Western European countries like Finland had high performance and low anxiety. **Self-efficacy**, defined as a student's belief in their ability to perform mathematical tasks, was found to be a strong positive predictor of mathematical literacy. **Mathematics anxiety**, a state of discomfort or fear when performing mathematical tasks, has a negative effect on achievement, leading some to avoid math classes and careers that involve mathematics. The study also found a negative correlation between mathematics anxiety and self-concept. **Self-concept**, which is an individual's orientation toward their ability and success in mathematics, is also positively related to academic achievement. The study's results are significant as they highlight the importance of these affective dimensions in mathematics education and their variability based on student characteristics and cultural context.

{%- include citation.html -%}