---
layout: paper
title: "Affective factors and instructional interactivity in education"
image: https://placehold.co/96x96/6A0DAD/ffffff?text=APSS\n2015
authors: Kahveci M
year: 2015
publisher: Association of Private Schools Society in Turkey
projectid: pchemlo
ref: "[Kahveci M](/murat). (2015). _Affective factors and instructional interactivity in education_. Paper presented at the Association of Private Schools Society in Turkey. Kaya Plazzo Hotel, Antalya, Turkey. January 28 - 31, 2015."
pdf:
doi:
excerpt: This seminar discusses using dual-process theories to address the gender gap and affective factors in education, advocating for interactive learning technologies.
conference: true
---

This seminar explores the critical relationship between affective and cognitive domains in education, framed within Dual-Process Theories. It argues that while education systems often prioritize the cognitive domain, focusing on easily measurable and objective variables like problem-solving ability, this approach fails to effectively support students with low motivation or interest. The seminar highlights that such students require additional support due to their learning challenges. The issue is further compounded by a significant gender gap, as female students tend to choose science and engineering fields less often than their male counterparts.

The presentation will delve into Dual-Process Theories, which propose that the affective domain operates quickly and influences the slower-working cognitive domain. As a direct consequence of this perspective, the importance of interactive learning will be discussed. The abstract suggests that interactive learning can be delivered at an individual level using educational technology. Specifically, the potential benefits of online systems like Derspektif will be examined, focusing on their ability to provide not only mental but also positive emotional experiences for students.

{% include citation.html %}