---
author: Murat Kahveci
title: The Le Châtelier’s Principle Experiment
tags: 
  - SSQ20 CHE 139
sidebar:
  nav: CHE139  
excerpt: Goals, assignments, and Q&As about the Le Châtelier’s Principle Experiment.
modify_date: 2020-08-06
---
<a class="button button--outline-success button--pill button--xs" href="/tpv">SSQ20 CHE 139</a>
`Experiment 7`{:.success}

__Table of Contents__

1. TOC (numbered)
{:toc}

## Goals

- Observe the effect of adding mixing various solutions or changing the temperature of a solution.
- Explain the observations using the relevant chemical reactions and Le Châtelier's principle.
- Be through!  
  - Do not simply state "Sodium hydroxide was added and the reaction shifted left."
  - See Figure 1 and 2 for some ideas

{% include image.html max-width="600px"
   file="/images/blog/bxh/1.jpg" alt="bxh 1"
   caption="Figure 1. Example observations using relevant chemical reactions." %}

{% include image.html max-width="600px"
   file="/images/blog/bxh/2.jpg" alt="bxh 1"
   caption="Figure 2. More complex observations using relevant chemical reactions. Often need to connect multiple reactions." %}


## Assignment

- Watch the videos, pass the postlab quiz, and download the Word document worksheet posted.
- Make careful observations.
- Type your responses on the Word document.
- Still photos are shown in addition to the video content to allow you to see the results more clearly.
  - For precipitates, describe the color, apparent consistency.
  - For translucent solutions, state the color and the depth of color (dark, light, etc.).
  - Note the formation of gas bubbles and any comments regarding temperature changes.
- Upload your final worksheet as a PDF document.
- You should review the `Lab Report Guidelines`, `Sample General Chemistry Lab Report`, and `Appendix E` on D2L while writing to ensure that your drafts are correctly formatted.

## Q&As

No incoming questions for this experiment.

## Team grading

```mermaid
  graph LR;
    A[Is the assignment for the Le Chateliers Principle Experiment graded as a team?]
    B[Which sections are graded by the instructor?]
    C[Which sections are graded by the teaching assistant?]

    B1[Proofreading and General Formatting]
    B2[Magnesium Chloride Solution]
    B3[Cobalt II Chloride Solution]
    B4[Silver Ion Soluion]

    C1[Prelab]
    C2[Postlab]
    C3[Saturated Sodium Chloride Solution]
    C4[Potassium Chromate Solution]

    A--yes-->B;
    A--yes-->C;
    B-->B1;
    B-->B2;
    B-->B3;
    B-->B4;

    C-->C1;
    C-->C2;
    C-->C3;
    C-->C4;
```

If you have any questions regarding your scores, please let [me](mailto:mkahveci@depaul.edu) or your [TA](mailto:brownt1129@gmail.com) know.