---
author: Murat Kahveci
title: The Amino Acid Titration Experiment
tags: 
  - SSQ20 CHE 139
sidebar:
  nav: CHE139  
excerpt: Goals, assignments, and Q&As about the Amino Acid Titration Experiment.
modify_date: 2020-08-06
---
<a class="button button--outline-success button--pill button--xs" href="/tpv">SSQ20 CHE 139</a>
`Experiment 8`{:.success}

__Table of Contents__

1. TOC (numbered)
{:toc}

## Goals

#### Identification of the unknown amino acid

- Plot a graph of $$pH$$ vs. $$V(mL)$$ of $$NaOH$$ added. 
- If a break (or breaks, in the case of polyprotic acids) is clearly visible, estimate the pKa (or multiple $$pKa$$ values in the case of polyprotic acids).
- Use the example titration curve in the previous slide as a guidance:
  - The vertical dashed line shows equivalence point and corresponding $$NaOH$$ volume.
  - The horizontal dashed line shows $$pH$$ value, which is equal to $$pKa$$ value. So, you determined the $$pKa$$ value. 
  - Repeat this process for each break if you have multiple breaks and determine all $$pKa$$ values.  
- Estimate the molar mass of the acid. 
- Use these data to find a match in Table 2, Table 3, or Table 4.

#### Calculate the molar mass of the acid

- At the equivalence point:

\begin{equation}
  \text{mol } OH^- = \text{mol amino acid}
\end{equation}

which means:

\begin{equation}
  \text{volume of } OH^- \times \frac{\text{mol } OH^-}{ \text{L} } \times \frac{ 1 \text{ mol amino acid}}{ 1 \text{ mol } OH^-} = \text{mol amino acid} 
\end{equation}

- Calculate molar mass using the moles of amino acid and the mass of sample.

\begin{equation}
  \text{molar mass of amino acid} = \frac{\text{g amino acid}}{\text{mol amino acid}}
\end{equation}

#### Determine the identity of amino acid

- Using the $$pKa$$ and molar mass values determine the identity of amino acid.
- Find a match in Table 2, Table 3, or Table 4.

## Assignment

- Watch the videos, pass the postlab quiz, and download your data set.
- Analyze the data in Excel
- Submit your partial lab report in PDF and all calculations in Excel file.
- You should review the `Lab Report Guidelines`, `Sample General Chemistry Lab Report`, and `Appendix E` on D2L while writing to ensure that your drafts are correctly formatted.

## Q&As

No incoming questions for this experiment.

## Team grading

```mermaid
  graph LR;
    A[Is the assignment for the Amino Acid Titration Experiment graded as a team?]
    B[Which sections are graded by the instructor?]
    C[Which sections are graded by the teaching assistant?]

    B1[Overall Clarity and Flow]
    B2[Abstract]
    B3[Results]
    B4[Discussion]
    B5[Proofreading and General Formatting]
    B6[Equivalence Points]
    B7[Discussion Prompts]

    C1[Procedure]
    C2[Table Formatting]
    C3[Prelab]
    C4[Postlab]
    C5[Results Table]
    C6[Titration Curve]
    C7[Excel Calculations]

    A--yes-->B;
    A--yes-->C;
    B-->B1;
    B-->B2;
    B-->B3;
    B-->B4;
    B-->B5;
    B-->B6;
    B-->B7;

    C-->C1;
    C-->C2;
    C-->C3;
    C-->C4;
    C-->C5;
    C-->C6;
    C-->C7;
```

If you have any questions regarding your scores, please let [me](mailto:mkahveci@depaul.edu) or your [TA](mailto:brownt1129@gmail.com) know.