---
author: Murat Kahveci
title: The Acids and Bases Experiment
tags: 
  - SSQ20 CHE 139
excerpt: Goals, assignments, and Q&As about the Acids and Bases Experiment.
modify_date: 2020-08-05
---
<a class="button button--outline-success button--pill button--xs" href="/tpv">CHE 139</a>
`Experiment 5`{:.success}

__Table of Contents__

1. TOC (numbered)
{:toc}

## Goals

### Examine the effect of dilution on the pH of strong and weak acids and bases

- Calculate, using $$ M_1V_1 = M_2V_2 $$, the concentration of HCl, NaOH, CH$$_3$$COOH, and NH$$_4$$OH for the 1:10 and 1:100 diluted solutions and the mixtures.

- Calculate $$[H_3O^+]$$ for each solution using the measured pH values and Equation $$ \ref{eq:H3O} $$.
  
\begin{equation}\label{eq:pH}
  pH = - \log [H_3O^+]
\end{equation}

\begin{equation}\label{eq:H3O}
  \text{[H}_3\text{O}^+\text{]} = 10^{-\text{pH}}
\end{equation}

- Make a plot of pH vs. concentration for HCl and CH$$_3$$COOH, and another for NaOH and NH$$_4$$OH.

- The strong and weak species should show a different dependence of pH on concentration.

### Calculating the values of $$  K_a $$ and $$  K_b $$

\begin{equation}\label{eq:Ka}
  K_a = \frac{ [A^-][H_3O^+] }{ [HA]}
\end{equation}

where, $$[H_2O]$$ is omitted because it is pure liquid.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:Kb}
  K_b = \frac{ [BH^+][OH^-] }{ [B] }
\end{equation} 

where, $$[H_2O]$$ is omitted because it is pure liquid.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:percent-ionization-acid}
  \% \text{ ionization} = \frac{ [H_3O^+]}{ [HA]_0} \times 100\% =  \frac{ [A^-] }{ [HA]_0 } \times 100\%
\end{equation}

\begin{equation}\label{eq:percent-ionization-base}
  \% \text{ ionization} = \frac{ [BH^+] }{ [B]_0 } \times 100\% = \frac{ [OH^-] }{ [B]_0 } \times 100\%
\end{equation}


- Calculate $$  K_a $$ using Equation \ref{eq:Ka},
- Calculate $$ K_b $$ using Equation \ref{eq:Kb},
- Calculate the percent dissociation of the weak acid using Equation \ref{eq:percent-ionization-acid}, and
- Calculate the percent dissociation of the weak base using Equation \ref{eq:percent-ionization-base}.

### Examine the pH of mixtures of strong and weak acids and bases

- Examine the pH of mixtures of strong and weak acids and bases to see how the presence of a strong acid or base impacts the percent dissociation of the weak acid or base.

- Calculate the percent dissociation of the weak acid using Equation \ref{eq:percent-ionization-acid}, and
- Calculate the percent dissociation of the weak base using Equation \ref{eq:percent-ionization-base}.


## Assignment

- Watch pH meter calibration video
- Watch solution preparation and pH determination video
    - Only shown for HCl; same process used for other solutions
- Take the post-lab quiz with a 70% or higher
- Download the data set and do the data analysis  
- You must upload a PDF file of __partial lab report__:
    - This is a deviation for the summer session only
    - Include the following sections: `Procedures`, `Results`, `pH Data Tables`, `pH vs. Concentration Plots`, and `Discussion` (not a full discussion section; just itemize and answer the questions.)
    - You don't need to include sample calculations in the partial report (it is in Excel only), don't need to write narrative explaining data tables and calculations.
- You must upload all calculations and data tables in an MS Excel file 
- You should review the `Lab Report Guidelines`, `Sample General Chemistry Lab Report`, and `Appendix E` on D2L while writing to ensure that your drafts are correctly formatted.

## Q&As

### Calculating the concentration of 1:10 and 1:100 solutions

> I think $$V_1$$ for stock solutions is 50 mL, but can’t figure out what $$V_1$$ is for 1:10 (10 mL ?) and 1:100 dilutions. I want to confirm that $$M_1$$ is 1.0 M for all calculations and $$V_2$$ is 100 mL. I’ve looked at the lab procedure and lab video, but get confused about the process of dilutions regarding volumes of $$V_1$$.

As an example, I will walk through the concentration calculations for the  hydrochloric acid dilutions.

The concentration of the stock solution,  $$M_1 = 1.00 \text{ M} $$ (let's use 3 sig. figs.)

where `1` means initial state. Likewise,  we would use `2` to indicate the final state.

#### 10-fold or 1:10 dilution

`Dilute the solution 10-fold by using a clean, primed, 10 mL volumetric pipette to add 10.00 mL of the stock acid solution to a 100 mL volumetric flask and filling it to the line with deionized water.`

This means:

- $$V_1 = 10.00 \text{ mL} $$, which is the amount taken from the stock solution.
- $$V_2 = 100.00 \text{ mL} $$, final volume after the dilution.

Calculate the concentration of 10-fold dilution as follows.

$$ M_1 V_1 = M_2 V_2 \notag $$ 

$$ M_2 = \frac{M_1 V_1}{V_2} \notag $$

$$ M_2 = \frac{(1.00 \text{ M}) (10.00 \text{ mL})}{100.00 \text{ mL}} \notag $$

$$ M_2 = 0.100 \text{ M HCl solution} \notag $$

#### Second 10-fold or 1:100 dilution

`Dilute this solution [i.e. 10-fold diluted colution] another 10-fold by using a 10 mL volumetric pipette to add 10 mL of the 1:10 acid solution to a 100 mL volumetric flask and filling it to the line with deionized water.`

So, we are using the concentration of 10-fold dilution as the initial concentration for the second 10-fold dilution.

$$ M_2 = \frac{(0.100 \text{ M}) (10.00 \text{ mL})}{100.00 \text{ mL}} \notag $$

$$ M_2 = 0.0100 \text{ M HCl solution} \notag $$

### Volumes in L or mL for dilution calculations

> I noticed in your sample calculations for the 10 and 100 fold dilutions you used the volumes in mL where molarity is calculated using the units liters. I was wondering if we were to use the volumes in mL as you did in the sample calculations under the Q&A's or convert these to the units of liters.

The unit of analysis for volume could be `mL` or `L` in dilution calculations because the volume units cancel.

## Team grading

```mermaid
  graph LR;
    A[Is the assignment for the Acids and Bases Experiment graded as a team?]
    B[Which sections are graded by the instructor?]
    C[Which sections are graded by the teaching assistant?]

    B1[Overall Clarity and Flow]
    B2[Results]
    B3[Proofreading and General Formatting]
    B4[pH Data Tables]
    B5[pH vs. Concentration Plots]
    B6[Discussion Questions]

    C1[Procedure]
    C2[Table Formatting]
    C3[Figure Formatting]
    C4[Prelab Quiz]
    C5[Postlab Quiz]
    C6[Excel Calculations]

    A--yes-->B;
    A--yes-->C;
    B-->B1;
    B-->B2;
    B-->B3;
    B-->B4;
    B-->B5;
    B-->B6;

    C-->C1;
    C-->C2;
    C-->C3;
    C-->C4;
    C-->C5;
    C-->C6;
```

If you have any questions regarding your scores, please let [me](mailto:mkahveci@depaul.edu) or your [TA](mailto:brownt1129@gmail.com) know.