---
title: "Micro-patterning of reaction arrays for self-organizing systems"
tags: [nonlinear_dynamics, microdevice]
sidebar: portfolio_sidebar
permalink: qoj.html
folder: portfolio
last_updated: Aug 26, 2020
summary: Recent advances in the photolithographic fabrication of micro-patterned elastomers open intriguing possibilities for the study of chemical self-organization in spatially structured reaction systems and coupled reactor arrays. Here, we present several procedures for the preparation of micro-patterned matrices for the Belousov-Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction and discuss their relative merits and limitations. 
authors: Kahveci M, Hamik C, Steinbock O
year: 2002
publisher: American Chemical Society (ACS)
projectid:
ref: "Kahveci M, Hamik C, & Steinbock O. (2002). <i>Micro-patterning of reaction arrays for self-organizing systems</i>. Paper presented at the American Chemical Society (ACS), 223(393-PHYS), Part 2 (Poster). Orlando, USA. April 7 - 11, 2002."
conference: true
series: "Conference"
weight: 4
---

{% include cite_head.html %}

These experimental strategies involve the use of photo-resist masters (SU-8) and poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) molds as well as the filling of the molds with aqueous reaction solutions. All of our experiments are carried out with the 1,4-cyclohexanedione-bromate-ferroin BZ system. This system is highly suitable for the use in micro-patterned reactor arrays because the reaction does not involve the formation of gaseous products that could give rise to undesired bubbles. In particular, we discuss the propagation and the interaction of constant-speed oxidation waves in different width sizes of linear channels as well as in a cone shape channel of excitable CHD-BZ medium. Experiments performed in capillary tubes ranging from 2 μm to 1200 μm have shown that there is no size dependence on velocities of oxidation waves. On the contrary, the oxidation waves traveled with different velocities inside the micro reactor arrays in PDMS due to the high bromine diffusion into the PDMS compared to glass capillary. Bromine acts as an inhibitor for BZ reaction reducing the velocity of oxidation waves. Furthermore, the micro reactor arrays provide a better approximation for one spatial dimension for the BZ system, which is easier to simulate.

{% include citation.html %}
