---
title: "Turkish high-school students’ attitudes toward learning mathematics"
tags: [affective_dimensions, mathematics_education, full_text_article]
sidebar: portfolio_sidebar
permalink: cnj.html
folder: portfolio
last_updated: Aug 26, 2020
summary: Attitudes towards mathematics, mathematics self concept and motivation to learn mathematics of 79 students coming from two high schools in Istanbul were measured. Three surveys were administered to the students at their schools; Fennema-Sherman scale, Self Description Questionnaire (SDQ II) and Students’ Motivation to Learn Mathematics (SMOT); having Cronbach alpha reliabilities of .92, .92 and .93 respectively. Factorial analyses were conducted for the three scales. As a result, attitudes towards mathematics was decomposed into eight factors, labeled usefulness of mathematics content, mathematics perceived as male domain, perceived mathematics success, teacher support, perceived mathematics ability and teacher’s belief about mathematics competency.
authors: Kahveci M, Imamoglu Y
year: 2006
publisher: International Conference on the Teaching of Mathematics (ICTM)
projectid:
ref: "Kahveci M, & Imamoglu Y. (2006). <i>Turkish high-school students’ attitudes toward learning mathematics</i>. Paper presented at the International Conference on the Teaching of Mathematics (ICTM). Istanbul, Turkey. June 30 - July 5, 2006."
conference: true
---

{% include cite_head.html %}

_Keywords_. Mathematics self-concept, motivation, attitude, factor analysis, Fennema-Sherman scale, Self Description Questionnaire, SMOT

## 1 Introduction

As mathematics is one of the components of basic education, every student has to develop mathematics skills to some extent. At the same time, it is generally accepted as a difficult subject because of its abstract nature and many students struggle to relate the mathematics they learn at school to real life situations. The necessities of current educational system in Turkey, national tests such as OKS and OSS (administered to enter high schools and universities, respectively) add the pressure on the students to be successful at mathematics. Still, students cannot perform well in both national and international tests. 2005 OSS results show that mathematics average was only 7.5 out of 25 questions, with standard deviation on 11.5 (OSYM, 2005). The results of international studies TIMSS 1999 (Mullis et al., 2000) and PISA 2003 (OECD, 2004) indicate that Turkish students’ mathematics average is significantly below than international average in all content areas (Turkey M=423, SD=105; international M=500, SD=100 in PISA 2003). Looking at the means according to school type show that private schools have higher mean (M=557, SE= 6.47) than public schools (M=418, SE= 53.68), even higher international average for private schools (M=526, SE= 1.49).

In PISA 2003, apart from the achievement test, students were asked about the following aspects of their approaches to learning mathematics: motivation, self related beliefs (self-concept and self- efficacy), mathematics anxiety and learning strategies. Results show that Turkish students coming from private and public schools (where students selected by national tests) have motivation, self-concept and self-efficacy in learning mathematics higher than international average (OECD, 2004). In addition, Turkish students exhibited lower mathematics anxiety compared to other nations in Europe (OECD, 2004). However, in state schools, self-concept and self-efficacy are lower than international average, with higher mathematics anxiety. Feeling of belonging to the school is lower than international average in both types of schools (Berberoglu, 2004).

This study aims at looking more closely to students’ motivational attitudes towards mathematics at two Turkish private schools. Another aim is to investigate whether these attitudes are affected by gender, age, and mathematics grade.

### 1.1 Motivation

Motivation can be defined as “an internal state that arouses, directs and maintains behavior”(Woolfolk, 2004). Causes of motivation can be internal, such as personal values or interests (intrinsic motivation) or they can be external, like rewards or punishments (extrinsic motivation). Attribution theory of motivation suggests that, students’ explanations for causes of academic success or failure can be categorized by the following dimensions: locus, referring to whether the causes come from the individual or from other people; stability, referring to whether the causes change over time; and controllability, whether the individual is able to control the cause (Weiner, as cited in Kloosterman, 1988). Students’ reasons for the cause of success or failure effects their motivation to attempt academic tasks. Students’ goal orientations also effect their motivation. Students having task-focused (learning) goals show personal interest in the task and believe that the task itself is rewarding, whereas students with performance goals either try to be best performer or be more successful than others (performance approach), or try not to be the least competent or be the poorest performer (performance avoidance)(Skaalvik & Skaalvik, 2004).

### 1.2 Self-Concept, Self-Efficacy, and Self-Esteem

Self-concept is “the composite of ideas, feelings and attitudes people have about themselves” (Woolfolk, 2004). Self-concept is divided into sub-categories of general, academic, social, emotional and physical self-concepts (Shavelson et al., 1976). Academic self- concept can be subject or course specific, but they are not item or task specific. Mathematics self- concept can be defined as “positive or negative orientation toward one's ability, performance, and success in the learning of mathematics” (Ma & Kishor, 1997b). Self-efficacy, on the other hand, is a judgment of one’s ability to perform a specific task (Pajares & Miller, 1994). Self-esteem refers to the one’s judgments of self-worth (Woolfolk, 2004).

### 1.3 Attitude toward Mathematics

In their meta-analysis, Ma and Kishor (1997b) state that attitude toward mathematics refers to students’ affective responses to whether they find mathematics easy/difficult or important/unimportant. They also quote the following definition by (Neale, 1969): 

>Attitude toward mathematics refers to students' affective responses to "a liking or disliking of mathematics, a tendency to engage in or avoid mathematical activities, a belief that one is good or bad at mathematics and a belief that mathematics is useful or useless."

## 2 Related Literature

Studies investigating motivation, self-concept, self-efficacy, mathematics attitude and mathematics achievement concentrates on the following topics: relationship between motivation and achievement (Greene et al., 1999), relationship between self-concept, self-efficacy, and mathematics achievement (Ma & Kishor, 1997b; Norwich, 1987; Pajares & Miller, 1994; Pietsch et al., 2003), relationship between mathematics attitude and achievement (Ma & Kishor, 1997a), and gender differences in these constructs (Githua & Mwangi, 2003; Skaalvik & Skaalvik, 2004; Stipek & Gralinski, 1991).

Greene et al. (1999) used a modified version of expectancy –value model (Ecless et al., as cited in Greene et al., 1999) which shows the relationships of values, beliefs and goals with effort and achievement, with respect to gender. Results show that task achievement goals predicted effort stronger than the other constructs. Prediction of achievement and effort differed according to gender and mathematics class type.

Kloosterman (1988) measured attribution style, effort as a mediator of mathematical ability, and failure as an acceptable phase in learning mathematics in order to explain self-confidence of 7<sup>th</sup> grade students. He concluded that attribution style was the strongest predictor of confidence, followed by effort as a mediator of mathematical ability. The results also showed that students were making attributions for failure more often than success. As an attempt to investigate predictive relations between self-efficacy and subsequent attainment in a mathematics task, Norwich (1987) assessed self-efficacy of primary school students (9-10 year-olds) over four trials. Between trials, students attempted mathematics tasks. Self-efficacy made no independent contribution to predicting task performance. However, prior self-efficacy and mathematics performance, independently predicted relations with self-efficacy when students were not familiar with the task but self-concept did not. When the students were familiar with the task, only prior self-efficacy had predictive relation with subsequent self-efficacy. In addition, mathematics self-concept and prior mathematics performance made significant contributions to predicting subsequent task performance. Another study about the effects of self-efficacy and self- concept on mathematics success was conducted by Pajares and Miller (1994) on undergraduate students. They concluded that, self-efficacy has stronger direct effects on performance than mathematics self- concept, perceived usefulness of mathematics, prior experience with mathematics or gender. Mathematics self-concept and high school level had modest direct effects. Self-efficacy was also reported to mediate the effect of gender and prior experience on mathematics self-concept, perceived usefulness of mathematics and mathematics performance. A more recent study on high school students (Pietsch et al., 2003) showed that competency component of self-concept was differentiated with affective component but overlapped with self-efficacy when they were measured at the same level of generality. Social comparison (students comparing themselves with other students) had equal effect on both self-concept and self-efficacy. Self-efficacy beliefs were more strongly related with mathematics performance.

In their meta analysis of the relationship of attitudes towards self and achievement in mathematics,
Ma and Kishor (1997b) considered self-concept, gender role and family support to be the main
indicators of attitude. They reached the following conclusions:

* The self-concept-achievement, the family support-achievement, and the male domain-achievement relationships were all statistically reliable;
* The three relationships did not show evident gender differences;
* The three relationships consistently decreased from the junior high grades to the senior high grades;
* The self-concept-achievement relationship varied as a function of ethnicity, whereas the family support achievement relationship was consistent across ethnic backgrounds;
* The three relationships were not consistent across sample selection;
* The self-concept-achievement relationship varied with sample size, whereas the family support- achievement and the male domain-achievement relationships were sample-size invariant;
* The self-concept-achievement relationship varied over time, whereas the family support-achievement and the male domain-achievement relationships remained almost unchanged over time; and
* There were no statistically significant interaction effects on any of the three relationships.

Gender differences were the basic concern in Stipek and Gralinski’s study (1991). They measured achievement related beliefs of 3<sup>rd</sup> grade (8-9 year-olds) and high school (13-14 year-olds) students before and after a regular mathematics exam. Girls reported lower ability and expectation of success. They were less likely to attribute success to high ability and failure to luck; instead, they were more likely to attribute failure to low-ability than boys. Gender differences were also found in the study of Githua & Mwangi (2003), in favor of boys, in students’ perception of likelihood of success and satisfaction in learning mathematics. They also concluded that girls in co-educational secondary schools in Kenya have the least self-concept and motivation to learn mathematics. Comparing mathematics and verbal self-concept of boys and girls in Norwegian high schools, Skaalvik & Skaalvik (2004) also encountered gender differences: Boys had higher self-concept, performance expectations, intrinsic motivation and self-enhancing ego orientation than girls in mathematics; while girls had higher intrinsic motivation to learn language than boys. Verbal self-concept of older students was higher than their mathematical self-concept, regardless of gender.

As can be understood from the above literature, relationships between motivational aspects, self- concept, self-efficacy and mathematics performance are complex in nature. In order to explain these relationships, Barker et al. (2004) proposed a model that relates achievement motivation (mastery, performance and social purposes) and academic self-concept (English and mathematics). The model fitted their data, however, not equally well across both sex groups.

## 3 Method

### 3.1 Participants and Procedures

Participants for this study were selected from two high schools, A and B, in Istanbul, Turkey. Both schools are private schools, students of which come from upper-class families. 40 students were chosen from school A and 39 students were chosen from school B using proportional stratified sampling with levels of grade and gender. Data were collected by administrating a paper-based survey to the students at their schools. Surveys asked for demographic information about gender, age, class and mathematics grade. Confidentiality of the students was protected and mathematics teachers in the schools helped to administer the instruments. Table 1 shows the distributions of participants with respect to their gender and grade level.

Grade | Male | Female | Total
 --- | --- | --- | ---
9<sup>th</sup> | 10 | 11 | __21__
10<sup>th</sup> | 9 | 17 | __26__
11<sup>th</sup> | 15 | 17 | __32__
Total | __34__ | __45__ | __79__

<figcaption>Table 1. Distribution of the participants. Please note that there are no parametric comparisons done between male and female students with respect to their grade level. i.e. Mean comparisons are carried out among the total values showed in bold.</figcaption>

### 3.2 Instruments

A modified version of Fennema-Sherman Scale (Doepken et al., 1993) was administered to the students. This scale measures participants’ attitudes towards mathematics. The test consists of 47 items, divided into the following categories: personal confidence about subject matter, usefulness of subject’s content, subject perceived as male domain, and perception of teacher attitudes. Items were translated into Turkish for this study and its overall reliability including all items turned out to be very high internal consistency (Cronbach alpha; ⍺ = .92).

Secondly, mathematics self-concept of participants was measured using the related self-concept items in SDQ II: Academic Self Description Survey II, which was originally developed by Marsh (1990) and then adapted by Githua and Mwangi (2003). These items were combined with items taken from ASDQ II, as adopted by Barker et al. (2004). All items in the adapted form were translated into Turkish language. Overall Cronbach alpha of the scale was found to be highly reliable (⍺ = .92).

Furthermore, another survey measuring students’ motivation to learn mathematics (SMOT) by a 28- item scale (Githua & Mwangi, 2003) was applied. The instrument originally measured the following categories: interest in learning mathematics, satisfaction, relevance, and perceived probability of success. 28 items were transcribed into Turkish language. The data collected showed strong internal consistency, having ⍺ = .93.

Response categories for all scales were from strongly agree to strongly disagree as follows:

* Strongly Disagree (1)
* Disagree (2)
* Neutral (3)
* Agree (4)
* Strongly Agree (5)
* Items reflecting negative attitude were scored in reverse order.

### 3.3 Data Analysis

Principal component factor analyses with varimax rotation were conducted for the three scales. Rotation method was done with Kaiser Normalization. To construct factor categories, factor loadings equal to or higher than .40 were accounted for a factor component. Categories containing less than
three items were removed from the analyses. A further mean comparison analysis, GLM, will be carried out although their results will not be presented in this paper.

## 4 Results

### 4.1 Attitudes toward Mathematics

Bartlett's test of sphericity (p=.000 < .05) indicated high correlation among items in the Fennema- Sherman scale. Thus, factor analysis over 47 items were performed. As a result, twelve factors were extracted, seven of which were interpretable due to the internal consistency condition (see Table 3). Categories corresponding to these factors are labeled as follows: Usefulness of mathematics content (U), mathematics perceived as a male domain (M), perceived mathematics success (PS), teacher support (TS), perceived mathematics ability (PA), perceived mathematics performance (PP), teachers’ belief of competency in mathematics (TB). The first two categories coincide with the original categories as of Doepken et al.(1993)’s study, while the items in the category of personal confidence in subject matter (as used by Doepken et al.) was further divided into three categories, namely, PA, PP, and PS. Perception of teacher attitude was also divided into two categories: TS and TB. Means, standard deviations and reliability coefficients of the categories, as well as the corresponding item numbers are given in Table 2.

Factor Category    |  Mean  | Standard Deviation  | Cronbach Alpha  | Contributing Items
------- | --- | --- | --- | ---
U | 3.04 | 1.26 | .91 | 3, 5, 10, 13, 14, 21, 27, 29, 34, 39, 42, 44
M | 4.29 | 1.04 | .90 | 9, 11, 15, 18, 24, 28, 31, 38, 46
PS | 3.47 | 1.16 |.84 | 7, 19, 23, 32, 43
TS | 3.76 | .99 | .80 | 2, 20, 45
PA | 4.03 | .91 | .76 | 1, 7, 16, 33, 37,40
PP | 3.05 | .97 | .80 | 12, 25, 41
TB | 3.66 | 1.01 | .64 | 16, 21, 22, 26

<figcaption>Table 2. Mean, standard deviation and reliability coefficients of the extracted factors from Fennema-Sherman survey.</figcaption>


Item    |  U  | M  | PS  | TS | PA | PP | TB
------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
I1 | .185 | -.104 | .229 | -.136 | __.548__ | .329 | .183
I2 | -.013 | .056 | .041 | __.863__ | .128 | .153 | .147
I3 | __.776__ | .171 | .035 | .114 | -.111 | .292 | .021
I5 | __.822__ | .193 | .038 | .056 | -.072 | .363 | .091
I7 | -.004 | .016 | .451 | .140 | __.581__ | -.094 | -.073
I9 | .151 | __.689__ | .257 | .133 | -.132 | -.109 | -.182
I10 | __.759__ | -.031 |  .124 | .086 | .101 | .261 | -.012
I11 | .016 | __.742__ | .121 | -.109 | -.026 | -.092 | .396
I12 | .234 | -.108 | .314 | .189 | .257 | __.636__ | .141
I13 | __.839__ | .091 | .035 | -.112 | -.033 | -.161 | .040
I14 | __.420__ | .039 | -.086 | .377 | -.093 | .182 | .216
I15 | -.035 | __.885__ | -.077 | .069 | .065 | .042 | .050
I16 | .100 | .001 | .253 | .348 | __.426__ | -.152 | __.432__
I18 | .141 | __.754__ | -.069 | .268 | -.084 | -.013 | -.047
I19 | .227 | .091 | __.724__ | .222 | .053 | .065 | .349
I20 | .122 | .074 | .134 | __.810__ | -.004 | .008 | -.004
I21 | __.573__ | .206 | .167 | .012 | .240 | .076 | __.480__
I22 | .181 | .134 | .239 | .192 | -.065 | .129 | __.566__
I23 | .290 | .194 | __.714__ | .073 | .067 | .108 | .177
I24 | .040 | __.621__ | .062 | -.137 | -.018 | .078 | __.517__
I25 | .335 | .086 | .379 | -.035 | .152 | __.593__ | -.114
I26 | .162 | .237 | .067 | .309 | .224 | .131 | __.516__
I27 | __.805__ | .180 | .171 | -.027 | .069 | .269 | -.119
I28 | -.058 | __.793__ | .273 | -.025 | .018 | -.012 | .026
I29 | __.652__ | -.060 | .034 | .215 | .217 | -.076 | -.262
I31 | .141 | __.785__ | .014 | -.129 | -.023 | .047 | .012
I32 | .266 | .121 | __.685__ | .180 | .194 | .358 | .155
I33 | .026 | -.088 | .132 | .082 | __.781__ | .271 | -.012
I34 | __.816__ | -.121 | .054 | -.060 | .213 | .045 | .125
I37 | .246 | .037 | .077 | .070 | __.851__ | .179 | .007
I38 | .158 | __.675__ | .159 | .224 | .026 | .191 | .027
I39 | __.765__ | .076 | .151 | .162 | .081 | .003 | .110
I40 | -.051 | .063 | .019 | .332 | __.515__ | -.143 | .128
I41 | .379 | .114 | .150 | .085 | .257 | __.733__ | .147
I42 | __.689__ | .075 | .327 | .039 | .256 | .160 | .241
I43 | .089 | .114 | __.806__ | .101 | .228 | .170 | -.126
I44 | __.640__ | .132 | .308 | .353 | .057 | -.231 | .114
I45 | .081 | .238 | .286 | __.674__ | .179 | .006 | -.035
I46 | .108 | __.860__ | -.006 | .118 | .092 | .032 | .051


<figcaption>Table 3. Factor loadings of Fennema-Sherman survey.</figcaption>

### 4.2 Mathematics Self-Concept

Bartlett's test of sphericity (p=.000 < .05) indicated high correlation among items in the combined ASDQ II and SDQ II scale. Thus, factor analysis over 17 items were performed. As a result, three factors were extracted and all of them were interpretable (see Table 4). Categories corresponding to these factors are: perceived performance and success (PS); feelings towards mathematics (F); perceived mathematics ability (PA). There two items appeared in more than one category. Means, standard deviations and reliability coefficients of the categories, as well as the corresponding item numbers are given in Table 5.

Item    |  PS  | F  | PA  
------- | --- | --- | --- 
A1 | __.785__ | .345 | .278
A2 | __.844__ | .097 | .095
A3 | __.561__ | __.511__ | .243
A4 | __.784__ | .288 | .308
A5 | __.676__ | .338 | .217
S1 | __.751__ | .157 | .269
S2 | __.679__ | .378 |.431
S3 | __.460__ | .146 |__.475__
S4 | .025 | .001 | __.756__
S5 | .233 | __.796__ |.015
S6 | .180 | .380 |__.647__
S7 | __.652__ | .396 |-.121
S8 | .373 | __.706__ |.068
S9 | __.628__ | .111 |.093
S10 | .330 | .067 |__.676__
S11 | __.725__ | .317 |.257
S12 | .147 | __.746__ |.395

<figcaption>Table 4. Factor loadings of ASDQ II & SDQ II.</figcaption>


Factor Category    |  Mean  | Standard Deviation  | Cronbach Alpha  | Contributing Items
------- | --- | --- | --- | ---
PS | 2.77 | .98 | .98 | A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, S1, S2, S3, S7, S9, S11
F | 2.53 | 1.02 | .80 | A3, S5, S8, S12
PA | 3.00 | 1.09 | .65 |  S3, S4, S6, S10

<figcaption>Table 5. Mean, standard deviation and reliability coefficients of extracted factors from ASDQ II & SDQ II.</figcaption>

### 4.3 Students’ Motivation to Learn Mathematics

Bartlett's test of sphericity (p=.000 < .05) indicated high correlation among items in the SMOT scale. Thus, factor analysis over 28 items were performed (see Table 6). 

Item    |  U  | IM  | PS  | S
------- | --- | --- | --- | ---
1  | .420 | __.692__ | .082 | .117
2  | .117 | __.736__ | .156 | -.022
3  | .301 | __.656__ | .020 | -.062
4  | .178 | __.694__ | .192 | .252
6  | -.061 | .336 | __.484__ | -.197
7  | .108 | .415 | __.733__ | .080
8  | __.621__ | .284 | .150 | -.043
9  | .019 | .228 | .007 | .121
10 | -.051 | .092 | __.759__ | .065
12 | .159 | __.676__ | .176 | .058
13 | .168 | __.525__ | -.163 | .288
14 | __.823__ | .142 | -.001 | .076
15 | .322 | .346 | .064 | -.005
16 | .320 | .075 | -.101 | __.783__
17 | __.568__ | .204 | .188 | .230
18 | .068 | __.614__ | .228 | .329
19 | .190 | .188 | .139 | __.780__
20 | -.206 | .093 | __.493__ | __.557__
21 | .131 | .090 | __.714__ | .055
23 | .294 | .166 | -.009 | .408
24 | __.825__ | .000 | -.062 | .233
25 | __.863__ | .197 | -.080 | .122
26 | __.708__ | .351 | .091 | .118
27 | __.493__ | __.511__ | .231 | -.003
28 | .385 | .077 | .324 | -.035

<figcaption>Table 6. Factor loadings for SMOT survey.</figcaption>


Eight factors were extracted from the factor analysis. Due to the internal consistency condition, four of these factors were interpreted. Categories corresponding to these four factors are: usefulness of mathematics (Utility value) (U), intrinsic motivation (IM), perceived probability of success (PS), and satisfaction (S). Means, standard deviations and reliability coefficients of the categories, as well as the corresponding item numbers are given in Table 7.

Factor Category    |  Mean  | Standard Deviation  | Cronbach Alpha  | Contributing Items
------- | --- | --- | --- | ---
U | 3.09 | 1.07 | .83 | 8, 14, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27
IM | 3.57 | 1.02 | .85 | 1,2,3,4,12,13,18,27
PS | 2.51 | 1.05 | .72 | 6,7,10,20,21.S:16,19,20,23
S | 3.09 | .88 | .70 | 16, 19, 20

<figcaption>Table 7. Mean, standard deviation and reliability coefficients of the extracted factors from SMOT.</figcaption>

## 5 Conclusion

Three different scales were administered to students of two high schools in Turkey, in order to examine their attitudes towards mathematics, mathematics self-concept and motivation to learn mathematics. A series of factor analyses were conducted to the obtained data.

Attitudes towards mathematics was decomposed into eight factors, labeled usefulness of mathematics content, mathematics perceived as male domain, perceived mathematics success, teacher support, perceived mathematics ability and teacher’s belief about mathematics competency.
Mathematics self-concept was decomposed into three factors: Perceived performance and success, feelings towards mathematics and perceived mathematics ability. Among these factors, mean differences with respect to mathematics grade occurred in perceived performance and success, and feelings towards mathematics.

Motivation to learn mathematics items were decomposed into four factors labeled usefulness of mathematics, intrinsic motivation, perceived probability of success and satisfaction. Significant mean differences were found in scores of intrinsic motivation with respect to class and mathematics grade, while perceived probability of success scores had significant differences with respect to age.

Overall, the categories have means higher than 3.00; with the exception of perceived performance and success in SDQII (PS) (M= 2.77, SD= .98), feelings toward mathematics (F) (M= 2.53, SD=1.02) and perceived probability of success in SMOT (PS) (M= 2.2.51, SD=1.05). It can be concluded that, in general, these students have a positive attitude towards mathematics, and they are highly motivated. This coincides with the findings of PISA 2003; Turkish students coming from private schools have higher motivation and mathematics self-concept than the international average (Berbero"lu, 2004). The reason for this difference could be due to the better educational opportunities offered by private schools.

Looking at the means of the extracted factors across the three surveys, the category mathematics perceived as male domain (M) has the highest mean (M= 4.29, SD= 1.04). Keeping in mind that items reflecting negative attitude were scored in reverse order, this means students do not see mathematics as a male domain.

This study investigated the motivational attitudes toward mathematics of students in two private schools. Similar studies should be conducted public schools in order to compare and contrast the situation, because there seems to be a big gap between different types of schools in Turkey, especially in mathematics education, as suggested by PISA 2003 results.

## References

- Barker, K. L., Dowson, M., & McInerey, D. M. (2004). Evolvement of students’ goals and academic self-concept: A multidimensional and hierarchical conceptualisation, The Australian Association for Research in Education. Melbourne, Australia.
- Berberoglu, G. (2004). Türk bakıs açısından PISA arastırma sonuçları. Retrieved May 17, 2006, from [http://www.konrad.org.tr/Egitimturk/07girayberberoglu.pdf](http://www.konrad.org.tr/Egitimturk/07girayberberoglu).
- Doepken, D., Lawsky, E., & Padwa, L. (1993). Modified Fennema-Sherman attitude scales. Retrieved 26 May, 2006, from [http://www.woodrow.org/teachers/math/gender/08scale.html](http://www.woodrow.org/teachers/math/gender/08scale.html)
- Githua, B. N., & Mwangi, J. G. (2003). Students' mathematics self-concept and motivation to learn mathematics: Relationship and gender differences among Kenya's secondary-school students in Nairobi and Rift Valley provinces. International Journal of Educational Development, 23(5), 487-499.
- Greene, B. A., DeBacker, T. K., Ravindran, B., & Krows, A. J. (1999). Goals, values, and beliefs as predictors of achievement and effort in high school mathematics classes. Sex Roles, 40(5-6), 421- 458.
- Kloosterman, P. (1988). Self-confidence and motivation in mathematics. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80(3), 345-351.
- Ma, X., & Kishor, N. (1997a). Assessing the relationship between attitude toward mathematics and achievement in mathematics: A meta-analysis. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 28(1), 26-47.
- Ma, X., & Kishor, N. (1997b). Attitude toward self, social factors, and achievement in mathematics: A meta-analytic review. Educational Psychology Review, 9(2), 89-120.
- Marsh, H. W. (1990). SDQ II: Manual & research monograph. New York: The Psychological Corporation, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
- Mullis, V. S., Martin, M. O., Gonzalez, E. J., Gregory, K., Garden, R. A., O'Connor, K. M., et al.
(2000). TIMSS 1999 international mathematics report. Retrieved May 17, 2006, from
[http://timss.bc.edu/timss1999i/pdf/T99i_Math_TOC.pdf](http://timss.bc.edu/timss1999i/pdf/T99i_Math_TOC.pdf).
- Neale, D. C. (1969). The role of attitudes in learning mathematics. Arith. Teacher, 16, 631-640. Norwich, B. (1987). Self-efficacy and mathematics achievement - A Study Of Their Relation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79(4), 384-387.
- OECD. (2004). Learning for tomorrow's world-first results from PISA 2003. Retrieved May 17, 2006, from [http://www.pisa.oecd.org/dataoecd/1/60/34002216.pdf](http://www.pisa.oecd.org/dataoecd/1/60/34002216.pdf).
- OSYM. (2005). ÖSS Ham puan ortalamaları. Retrieved May 17, 2006, from
[http://www.osym.gov.tr/BelgeGoster.aspx?F6E10F8892433CFF7A2395174CFB32E12858DA1
8F4388CDD](http://www.osym.gov.tr/BelgeGoster.aspx?F6E10F8892433CFF7A2395174CFB32E12858DA1
8F4388CDD).
- Pajares, F., & Miller, M. D. (1994). Role of self-efficacy and self-concept beliefs in mathematical
problem-solving - A path-analysis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86(2), 193-203. 
- Pietsch, J., Walker, R., & Chapman, E. (2003). The relationship among self-concept, self-efficacy, and
performance in mathematics during secondary school. Journal of Educational Psychology,
95(3), 589-603.
- Shavelson, R. J., Hubner, J. J., & Stanton, G. C. (1976). Self-concept - validation of construct
interpretations. Review of Educational Research, 46(3), 407-441.
- Skaalvik, S., & Skaalvik, E. M. (2004). Gender differences in math and verbal self-concept,
performance expectations, and motivation. Sex Roles, 50(3-4), 241-252.
- Stipek, D. J., & Gralinski, J. H. (1991). Gender differences in childrens' achievement-related beliefs and
emotional responses to success and failure in mathematics. Journal of Educational Psychology,
83(3), 361-371.
- Woolfolk, A. (2004). Educational psychology (9th ed.). Boston: Pearson.

{% include citation.html %}