---
layout: misc
title: About
---

**<span class="knx"><span class="k">K</span><span class="nx">NX</span></span>** explores the intersection of emotions and learning in chemistry education. We use quantitative research methods to understand how personal factors and emotions influence students' understanding of complex chemistry topics. We are also interested in the changing landscape of remote learning, especially after the pandemic.

**<span class="knx"><span class="k">K</span><span class="nx">NX</span></span>** provides resources for chemistry education researchers, students, and anyone interested in the latest trends and best practices in the field.

* **Explore our research:** [/projects](/projects)
* **Browse our publications:** [/papers](/papers)
* **Learn about our courses:** [/courses](/courses)
* **Read our blog:** [/blog](/blog)

## Source Code

**<span class="knx"><span class="k">K</span><span class="nx">NX</span></span>** is built using the open-source code from [bedford.io](https://github.com/blab/blotter), available under the [MIT license](https://github.com/blab/blotter#license).

**For developers:**

* **Code snippets:** [/code](/code)
* **Metadata format:** [/format](/format)
* **Markdown style guide:** [/style](/style)


## Updates

- **New Biking Activities Module:** [/biking](/biking)  
  Refer to [/format](/format) for data instructions.

- **New Courses Module:** [/courses](/courses)

- **New Tagging Feature for the Blog:** [/blog/tags/](/blog/tags/)

- **Updated Team Module:** [/team](/team)  
  Includes auto-generated content for members.

- **Expanded Publications Module:**  
  Covers Books, Journal Papers, and Conference Papers.

- **Rewritten Projects Module:** [/projects](/projects)  
  A standalone module with auto-populated publications for each project.


### Logo Evolution

#### Current Logo

{% include image.html
file="/images/logo.png"
title="Figure 3."
caption='December 1, 2024 - Present.'
width="250px"
%}

Here is the logo for <span class="knx"><span class="k">K</span><span class="nx">NX</span></span> designed with a professional and minimalist style suitable for representing Kahveci Nexus.

#### Previous Logos

{% include image.html
file="/images/old-logos/logo-231221.png"
title="Figure 2."
caption="December 23, 2023 - December 1, 2014."
width="250px"
%}

This AI-enhanced design features a striking metallic texture complemented by 3D effects and dynamic lighting, set against a space-themed gradient. The design elements are skillfully arranged to convey a sense of motion, effectively capturing the essence of animation. This logo symbolizes our brand's evolution and commitment to innovation and modern aesthetics.

{% include image.html
file="/images/old-logos/logoSAVE.png"
title="Figure 1."
caption='January 1, 2013 - December 23, 2023.'
width="250px"
%}

Schrödinger Equation-Inspired Logo. This logo, crafted using the TikZ package in LaTeX, represents a fusion of physical chemistry and education. It features an elegant design inspired by the Schrödinger equation, rendered in crisp vector graphics. Emblematic of personal style and academic pursuits, it served as a reflection of identity.