---
layout: misc
title: "Join Us: Collaborate and Innovate"
---

Explore opportunities to join our academic and research network, contributing to impactful projects and advancing science education.

### Research Fellows
Are you passionate about chemistry education research? Collaborations on joint proposals for external funding and co-authoring publications are warmly welcomed. Let's drive forward innovative methodologies and impactful studies together.

### Publishers
We are always enthusiastic about publishing our findings to connect with and benefit the wider community. Our work spans diverse topics in chemistry education, educational technology, and student engagement strategies.

### Graduate Students
If you're seeking an external committee member for your Master's or doctoral research, Dr. Kahveci brings a wealth of expertise in inquiry-based learning, pedagogical innovation, and cross-cultural educational practices. Feel free to discuss potential mentorship opportunities tailored to your research needs.

### Why Join Us?
Dr. Kahveci’s extensive experience in both K-12 and higher education creates a unique perspective, blending practical teaching methodologies with cutting-edge research. Join a vibrant network that fosters diversity, innovation, and meaningful contributions to STEM education.

Interested? Let’s contact and create a positive impact in the academic and educational community.

<a href="/contact" class="btn btn-primary">Contact</a>
<a href="/murat" class="btn btn-secondary">Dr. Kahveci</a>
