---
layout: post
title:  "Request for Letter of Recommendation"
author: Murat Kahveci
excerpt: Guidelines for requesting a recommendation letter, including required materials, deadlines, and important considerations for a strong endorsement.
tags:
  - My Students
---
## Recommendation Letter Guidelines

I am committed to supporting exceptional students who have excelled in my research group or performed outstandingly in my classes. If you are planning to apply for graduate school, medical school, or employment opportunities, I am happy to consider writing a recommendation letter for you.

## Important Considerations

- A strong recommendation letter comes from faculty who know you well beyond the classroom. If you were only a student in my class and not involved in my research group, it might be better to ask another faculty member who can provide detailed insights into your qualifications and experiences that are not apparent from your transcript.

## Guidelines for Requesting a Recommendation Letter

To ensure I can provide a thoughtful and impactful recommendation, please follow these steps:

### Initial Contact
- **Email me early** to request a recommendation letter and schedule a meeting to discuss your future career plans.
- I write recommendation letters only for students who agree to **waive their rights to access the letters**.

### Submission of Materials
Submit the following materials to me **in person** at least one month before the due date. Early submissions are highly encouraged to allow sufficient time for preparation.

1. **A short paragraph** (typed) summarizing:
  - Your interactions with me, including classes you attended and your grades.
  - Your involvement in my research group, specifying the quarters, tasks, and responsibilities.
2. **Required forms** for each school or employer, filled out as completely as possible.
3. **Your current CV or resume.**
4. **A copy of your personal statement.**
5. A detailed document containing:
  - Your overall GPA and Chemistry GPA.
  - GRE scores (if applicable).
  - Previous research experience.
  - Specific career goals, research interests for graduate or medical school, and other notable academic achievements.
6. **A comprehensive list of application addresses, schools, and due dates.**
  - Send me this list in both printed form and as a **PDF document via email**.

### Follow-Up
- Once your application process is complete, please [email me](/contact) to let me know about your acceptances and which program you’ve selected.
- Stay in touch! I’d love to hear about your experiences in graduate or medical school.

By following these steps, you help ensure I have the information needed to craft a strong, personalized recommendation letter that reflects your achievements and potential. I look forward to supporting your academic and professional journey.

