---
layout: post
title: Sakai Tweaks
author: Murat Kahveci
image: /images/blog/sakai.jpg
tags: 
   - Online Teaching
   - Sakai
published: true
---

## Introduction

[Sakai](https://sakai.luc.edu) is our LMS at <a class="off" href="https://www.luc.edu">Loyola University Chicago</a>. This post will include some setups I often use and since these steps are needed only every semester, I prefer to write them down as a reminder for myself, while hoping that the post would also be useful for my readers. This post will be expanded in the future as new setups needed.

## Common Tasks

### 1. Copying a Course from a Project Page in Sakai

As an instructor, login Sakai and navigate to your new course that you need to add new content. Follow these steps:

* `Site Info` > `Import from Site`, if one imports from a `Project Site` within `Sakai`. You should be added to the `Project Site` in order to see it as an import option. 
* As a precaution, I always select `I would like to merge my data` in the next step.
* Select the `Project Site` that you want to copy its contents. A nice feature of `Import from Site` in `Sakai` is you can import from multiple `Project Sites` in this step.
* The import process is typically completed in 2 minutes. 
* On 8/28/2022: My test today turned out to be with errors, actually. The issue was `Assignments` and `Tests & Quizzes` modules failed to import. After the third attempt with `I would like to replace my data` option selected, those modules were copied as expected. As I did not see any error messages, I had no idea about the source of this error. 

### 2. Adding a TA to Your Course

An instructor cannot add or remove course participants including TAs. It has to be done via the ITS Service Portal.

* Log in <a class="off" href="https://luc.saasit.com">https://luc.saasit.com</a>
* Search `Sakai`
* Click `Sakai enrollment`.
* Fill out the work order form.

### 3. Achieving Group-Based Tasks

#### 3.1 Make Groups

Make groups within a course by:

* `Site Info` > `Manage Groups` > `Bulk Creation`
* Export student names and IDs using `Gradebook` > `Export`. Ude fault file type which is `.CSV`.
* Insert a new column as the first column. Make groups in this column. Typically, we have two groups in `CHEM 111`. We assign students by alternating Group labels as A and B until all students are complete. Default order of names are by last name; keep this order unchanged for simplicity.
* Make sure that the second column is `User ID`. See Figure 1 for data formatting rules.
* Delete all the rest of the columns, and the first row (no `headers`).
* Import the `.CSV` file using the file dialog in Figure 1.
* All students are assigned to a group once `Bulk Create Groups` button is clicked.

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/blog/0001.jpg"
   title="Figure 1"
   caption="Import screen: File selection." %}

#### 3.2 Make Group-Based Assignments

* Click `Edit` an existing assignment (or make a new assignment).
* Scroll down and find  `Assign To` > `Each individual member of the selected group(s)` (for individual assignments) > Select a Group to assign. See Figure 2.

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/blog/0002.jpg"
   title="Figure 2"
   caption="Assign an assignment to a group." %}

#### 3.3 Make Group-Based Announcements

* Click `Announcements` > `Add`.
* Scroll down and find  `Access` > `Display this announcement to selected groups only`. See Figure 3.
* I always set `Email Notification` to `High - All group members`, which will trigger an email message to only specified group. Kind of a need! We target only certain groups...

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/blog/0003.jpg"
   title="Figure 3"
   caption="Assign an announcement to a group." %}

#### 3.4 Make Group-Based Tests & Quizzes

* Click `Edit` and existing test or quiz.
* Click `Settings` > `Availability and Submissions` > `Assessment released to` > select a group (See Figure 4).

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/blog/0004.jpg"
   title="Figure 4"
   caption="Assign a quiz or test to a group." %}

#### 3.5 Sending Group-Based Emails

This feature is quite handy if you want to email data files to a group. 

* Click `Email` and `Compose`.
* `To` > `Groups` > select a group to send the message (See Figure 5).

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/blog/0005.jpg"
   title="Figure 5"
   caption="Sending an email to a group." %}

#### 3.6 Gradebook with Group-Based Scores

Once all `grade items` are assigned to a `grade category`, groups don't make any difference in weighed grade calculations. e.g. Figure 6 shows a class's Lab 2 grades. Lab 2 score will be calculated equally if a student's score resides in Group A or B.

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/blog/0006.jpg"
   title="Figure 6"
   caption="Groups don't make any difference in weighed grade calculations." %}

#### 3.7 Group-Based Resources

Resources module is no exception when it comes to sharing documents group-wise.

* Click `Resources` and `Edit` existing file.
* Under `Edit Details` > `Availability and Access` > `Display this file to selected groups only.` > select a group (See Figure 7).
* As seen in Figure 7, one can do more detailed groups for different activities. e.g. I have groups for `Datasets`.

{% include image.html 
   file="/images/blog/0007.jpg"
   title="Figure 7"
   caption="Assign a file to a group." %}
