---
layout: post
title: Grades from Labster to Sakai
author: Murat Kahveci
image: /images/blog/sakai.jpg
excerpt: A detailed workflow for manually exporting Labster grades and importing them into the Sakai Gradebook, including step-by-step instructions for data manipulation in Excel to ensure accuracy and consistency.
tags:
  - functional logs
  - online teaching
  - labster
---

## Introduction

[Sakai](https://sakai.luc.edu) is our LMS at <a class="off" href="https://www.luc.edu">Loyola University Chicago</a>. This post will include some setups I often use and since these steps are needed only every semester, I prefer to write them down as a reminder for myself, while hoping that the post would also be useful for my readers. This post will be expanded in the future as new setups needed.

## Motivation

[Labster](https://www.labster.com/) integration with Sakai had some unresolved issues in the Fall 2022 semester. The `Gradebook` sync problems seem to occur when one adds Labster simulations through the `Assignments` module. 

I did not want to transfer grades manually not only because I have many students but also I am concerned by the data consistency. Instead, I developed the following workflow to do the manual grade import by a mechanical and repeatable manner. 

## Workflow

### 1. Exporting Grades from the Labster Dashboard

Download `All grade data` from Labster dashboard (Figure 1). You would get all of your class grades available in the Labster server in `.csv` format, which means:

- All simulations
- All attempts per student
- Grades in percent values
- Progress percentages 
- Durations
- Data and time

{% include image.html
file="/images/blog/uzj/01.jpg"
title="Figure 1"
caption="All grade data." %}

### 2. Excel Manipulations

To import grades into Sakai Gradebook, `UVID` is required as first column in `.CSV` file. It can be extracted from `Email` column by the following steps:

- Insert a new column next to `Email` column.
- Select `Email` column.
- Click `Data > Text to Columns`. 
- Select `Delimited > Delimiters > Other: @`. (Figure 2)
- Click `Finish`.


{% include image.html
file="/images/blog/uzj/02.jpg"
title="Figure 2"
caption="Extract `UVID` values from email addresses." %}

- Rename `Email` column to `Student ID` and copy it as first column.
- Rename `Last Name` as `Name` and delete all columns except `Student ID`, `Name`, `Simulation name`, and `Score (/100)`.  (Figure 3)

{% include image.html
file="/images/blog/uzj/03.jpg"
title="Figure 3"
caption="Required Excel columns." %}

- Rename `Simulation name` to actual sim name and append the max points in brackets. e.g. `Lab Safety [110]` and calculate each grade accordingly with zero decimals. And delete `Score (/100)` column. (Note that you must copy and paste the values `Lab Safety [110]` before you delete this column.) (Figure 4)

{% include image.html
file="/images/blog/uzj/04.jpg"
title="Figure 4"
caption="Scale the grades." %}

- The remove duplicate attempts and assign the highest score, sort by `Student ID` > `A to Z` and `Lab Safety [110]` > `Largest to Smallest` (Figure 5)

{% include image.html
file="/images/blog/uzj/05.jpg"
title="Figure 5"
caption="Sort the grades." %}

- Select `Student ID` column and click `Home` > `Conditional Formatting` > `Highlight Cells Rules` > `Duplicate Values`. (Figure 6)

{% include image.html
file="/images/blog/uzj/06.jpg"
title="Figure 6"
caption="Highlight duplicate `Student ID`s." %}

- Delete all values except the highest score for every student (Figure 7). Sakai does not show any errors for blank lines, so I keep them to save time.

{% include image.html
file="/images/blog/uzj/07.jpg"
title="Figure 7"
caption="keep only max scores for each student." %}

- Finally, save this worksheet as a new `.csv` file. e.g. `Lab-Safety.csv`. 
- Import `Lab-Safety.csv` using  `Sakai` > `Gradebook` > `Import/Export` menu.

## Conclusion

I hope this workflow is useful. Please let [me](/murat) know if you use this method and how you like it. Also, please let me know if you have alternative solutions. 