---
layout: post
author: Murat Kahveci
title: "Transforming General Chemistry Education: The EChEmpower Project"
projectid: echempower
tags: 
  - EChEmpower Project
  - SOTL Fellowship Journey
  - Projects

excerpt: "EChEmpower, a groundbreaking research initiative, is on a mission to transform general chemistry education. This project brings together a diverse team of experts to tackle the persistent issue of student misconceptions that hinder learning in chemistry. By collaborating with faculty members and applying innovative pedagogical approaches, EChEmpower aims to empower both educators and students, ultimately improving the quality of chemistry education. Join us on this transformative journey to revolutionize how we teach and learn chemistry."

---

## Synopsis

[EChEmpower](/thr) is a groundbreaking research initiative focused on revolutionizing general chemistry education. With the aim of identifying and rectifying student misconceptions, our diverse team of experts collaborates with faculty members specializing in general chemistry over two distinct phases from Fall 2023 to Spring 2025.

## Background and Motivation
EChEmpower is motivated by the pressing need to enhance the quality of general chemistry education. Many students struggle with misconceptions that hinder their progress in science-related fields. Our project seeks innovative pedagogical approaches to rectify these misconceptions and improve the overall learning experience.

## Collaborative Approach
EChEmpower promotes collaboration between faculty members teaching general chemistry and pedagogy experts to address the challenges in chemistry education effectively.

## Research Phases

* Phase 1 (Fall 2023 - Spring 2024): In this phase, we identify common student misconceptions, develop diagnostic tools, and conduct a pilot study to assess their effectiveness.

* Phase 2 (Fall 2024 - Spring 2025): We collect data and assess the impact of adjustments to teaching strategies based on Phase 1 findings.

## Pedagogical Frameworks
EChEmpower employs innovative pedagogical frameworks like student-centered design and constructivist epistemology within the context of Ignatian Pedagogy to address misconceptions.

## Outcomes and Contribution
EChEmpower aims to enhance general chemistry education through evidence-based teaching strategies, promoting student-centered design, and constructivism, improving students' ability to master key concepts.

## Research Dissemination
We will share our findings at renowned conferences in Chemistry Education Research and publish in peer-reviewed journals to make our research accessible to educators, researchers, and practitioners in the field.

## Conclusion
In summary, the EChEmpower project strives to enhance general chemistry education through innovative pedagogical approaches, foster collaboration, and share its findings widely. Join us in transforming the educational experience in general chemistry.