---
layout: post
author: Murat Kahveci
title: "Revolutionizing Biochemistry Education: UMiB-SCDCE Project"
projectid: umib-scdce
tags: 
  - UMiB-SCDCE Project
  - SOTL Fellowship Journey
  - Projects

excerpt: "The UMiB-SCDCE project is a collaborative effort aimed at transforming biochemistry education by addressing misconceptions. Through innovative pedagogical methods and collaboration with faculty, the project aims to reveal and rectify these misconceptions in two dedicated phases. Their goal is to provide evidence-based teaching strategies and contribute valuable insights to the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning (SOTL)."

---

## Introduction
The [UMiB-SCDCE](/ewm) project seeks to address misconceptions in biochemistry education, a common hurdle to student learning. Through collaboration with faculty, innovative pedagogical methods, and broad dissemination, it aims to transform biochemistry education.

## Collaborative Approach
The project collaborates with faculty members from the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry to identify and rectify misconceptions. It combines research and pedagogy to enhance teaching strategies.

## Project Phases

The project unfolds in two phases:

* Phase 1 (Fall 2023 - Spring 2024): Identifying misconceptions and creating diagnostic tools.
* Phase 2 (Fall 2024 - Spring 2025): Evaluating teaching strategies and eliminating misconceptions.

## Pedagogical Frameworks

UMiB-SCDCE uses Student-Centered Design, Constructivist Epistemology, and Ignatian Pedagogy to develop tailored interventions.

## Project Outcomes

The project aims to contribute to the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning by providing evidence-based strategies to address misconceptions in biochemistry, ultimately improving learning outcomes.

## Sharing Knowledge
The project will share its findings at key Chemistry Education Research conferences and in peer-reviewed journals.

## Conclusion
The UMiB-SCDCE project holds promise for revolutionizing biochemistry education by addressing misconceptions and promoting effective pedagogical methods.