---
layout: member
name: Ajda Kahveci
short_name: ajda
title: Ajda Yilmaz
image: /images/team/ajda-kahveci.png
position: Research Collaborator
active: 2012 - 2017
email: "ajda.kahveci@gmail.com"
cv:
googlescholar: Gvml1z8AAAAJ
researchgate: Ajda_Kahveci
modify_date: 2020-06-20   
alumni: true
---

Dr. Ajda Yilmaz earned a PhD in Science Education with specialization in Chemistry Education from Florida State University in 2005. She has published research in her areas of interest in leading science and chemistry education journals, authored book chapters and co-authored secondary level chemistry textbooks. Her research interests include gender equity in science education, inquiry methods in science teaching, and pre-service chemistry teacher education. Currently, she is Associate Editor of the [Chemistry Education Research and Practice](http://www.rsc.org/journals-books-databases/about-journals/chemistry-education-research-practice/) journal published by the Royal Society of Chemistry.

[//]: # ({%- include member-contributions.html -%})

Joint Projects
1. Pedagogical discontentment and self-efficacy of science teachers (2013 - 2015)

Joint Publications
Journal Articles
5. Kahveci A, Kahveci M, Mansour N, & Alarfaj MM. (2018). Exploring science teachers’ affective states: Pedagogical discontentment, self-efficacy, intentions to reform, and their relationships. Research in Science Education, 48(6), 1359–1386.

4. Kahveci M, Kahveci A, Mansour N, & Alarfaj M. (2016). Construct validity and reliability measures of scores from the Science Teachers’ Pedagogical Discontentment (STPD) scale. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 12(3), 549-558.

Conference Papers
3. Kahveci M, Kahveci A, Mansour N, & Alarfaj MM. (2015). Construct validity and reliability measures of scores from the Science Teachers’ Pedagogical Discontentment (STPD) Scale. Paper presented at the National Association for Research in Science Teaching International Conference (NARST). Chicago, IL, USA. April 11 - 14, 2015.

2. Kahveci M, & Kahveci A. (2004). The significance of interactivity in gender equitable education. Paper presented at the Society for Information Technology and Teacher Education (SITE). Atlanta, USA. March 1 - 6, 2004.

1. Kahveci A, & Kahveci M. (2004). Instructional interactivity and technology components of a freshman chemistry course. Paper presented at the Society for Information Technology and Teacher Education (SITE). Atlanta, USA. March 1 - 6, 2004.

