---
layout: member
name: Bridget Colacchio
short_name: bridget
title: Bridget Colacchio
image: /images/team/bridget-colacchio.jpg
position: Research Collaborator
active: 2023 - Present
email: bcolacchio@luc.edu
modify_date: 2023-09-01     
---

Bridget joined the FCIP team in January 2019, but has been a Loyola staff member since 2007. Bridget received her BA in Sociology and Women’s Studies from Boston College and MA in Clinical Social Work from the University of Chicago. She recently completed her PhD in Social Work here at Loyola University Chicago. Bridget’s commitment to and passion for Jesuit education began as a student at BC, grew as a teacher at Cristo Rey Jesuit High School on Chicago’s southwest side, and has been the guiding force in her work with students and colleagues since then.

Bridget supports FCIP in our overall efforts to promote excellence in teaching at Loyola, and to support faculty, staff and graduate students as they incorporate Ignatian Pedagogy, anti-oppressive pedagogy and student-centered learning in their work in and out of the classroom. As an instructor in Loyola’s School of Social Work, Bridget employs the principles and tactics of FCIP's Pedagogy of Justice to challenge and support her students, and enrich their educational experience. Bridget's research is focused on the well-being of systems-impacted youth, particularly those who have experienced the foster care system. Away from the office and classroom, Bridget lives in Edgewater with her family and is a loyal Loyola sports fan. Go Ramblers!

For more detailed information about her research, please visit her webpage [here](https://www.luc.edu/fcip/aboutus/staff/bridgetcolacchiophdlcsw.shtml).

{%- include member-contributions.html -%}